README.md, before:

# 2018

The goal is to learn computer science subjects: algorithms, data structures and
the like. I'm also throwing in some maths, particularly discrete mathematics. I
also need to acquire web dev skills, so I'm doing coding projects as well.

## Rules

- Always be working on one course/project.
- Add bonus objectives from the bonus list as often as desired.
- All assignments must be completed for course to be considered complete.

## Link to original speedstudy repo

https://github.com/P1xt/speedstudy

## Progress

**Courses Completed:** 0

**Total Points earned:** 230

**Current Course:** TBD (working on a project)

**Current Project:**

- [fCC Voting App](https://www.freecodecamp.org/challenges/build-a-voting-app)

**Current Book(s):**

- [Discrete Mathematics: An Open Introduction](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi/)
* [You Don't Know JS: Scope & Closures](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/scope%20&%20closures/README.md#you-dont-know-js-scope--closures)

| Date Finished | Activity                  | Points | Links  |
| ------------- | ------------------------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| Jan 19        | Khan Academy              | 10     | [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/gckev/) |
| Jan 20        | Khan Academy              | 10     | [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/gckev/) |
| Jan 21        | Khan Academy              | 10     | [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/gckev/) |
| Jan 21        | YKDJS: Up & Going         | 200    | [YKDJS: Up & Going](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/tree/master/up%20&%20going#you-dont-know-js-up--going) |

## Computer Science Intensive

- [ ] [Learn to Code HTML & CSS](http://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/)
- [ ] [Introduction to Computer Science](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-computer-science-harvardx-cs50x#!)
- [ ] [Learn to Code Advanced HTML & CSS](http://learn.shayhowe.com/advanced-html-css/)
- [ ] [Effective Thinking Through Mathematics](https://www.edx.org/course/effective-thinking-through-mathematics-utaustinx-ut-9-01x)
- [ ] [Getting Sassy with CSS](http://www.sassshop.com/#/)
- [ ] [How to Code: Simple Data](https://www.edx.org/course/how-code-simple-data-ubcx-htc1x)
- [ ] [How to Code: Complex Data](https://www.edx.org/course/how-code-complex-data-ubcx-htc2x)
- [ ] [Software Construction: Data Abstraction](https://www.edx.org/course/software-construction-data-abstraction-ubcx-softconst1x)
- [ ] [Software Construction: Object-Oriented Design](https://www.edx.org/course/software-construction-object-oriented-ubcx-softconst2x)
- [ ] [Software Engineering: Introduction](https://www.edx.org/course/software-engineering-introduction-ubcx-softeng1x)
- [ ] [Programming for the Web with JavaScript](https://www.edx.org/course/programming-web-javascript-pennx-sd4x)
- [ ] [MongoDB for Node.js Developers](https://university.mongodb.com/courses/M101JS/about)
- [ ] [Calculus One](https://www.coursera.org/learn/calculus1)
- [ ] [Mathematics for Computer Science](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-042j-mathematics-for-computer-science-spring-2015/index.htm)
- [ ] [Algorithms, Part I](https://www.coursera.org/learn/algorithms-part1)
- [ ] [Algorithms, Part II](https://www.coursera.org/learn/algorithms-part2)
- [ ] [UX Design for Mobile Developers](https://www.udacity.com/course/ux-design-for-mobile-developers--ud849)
- [ ] [Android Development for Beginners](https://www.udacity.com/course/android-basics-user-interface--ud834)
- [ ] [Software Testing](https://www.udacity.com/course/software-testing--cs258)
- [ ] [Software Debugging](https://www.udacity.com/course/software-debugging--cs259)
- [ ] [Calculus Two: Sequences and Series](https://www.coursera.org/learn/advanced-calculus)
- [ ] [Software Architecture & Design](https://www.udacity.com/course/software-architecture-design--ud821)
- [ ] [Databases mini-courses](https://lagunita.stanford.edu/courses/DB/2014/SelfPaced/about)
- [ ] [Agile Software Development](https://www.edx.org/course/agile-software-development-ethx-asd-1x)
- [ ] [Introduction to Cloud Infrastructure Technologies](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-cloud-infrastructure-linuxfoundationx-lfs151-x)
- [ ] [Intro to Theoretical Computer Science](https://www.udacity.com/course/intro-to-theoretical-computer-science--cs313)
- [ ] [Introduction to Probability - The Science of Uncertainty](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-probability-science-mitx-6-041x-2)
- [ ] [Linear Algebra - Foundations to Frontiers](https://www.edx.org/course/linear-algebra-foundations-frontiers-utaustinx-ut-5-04x#!)
- [ ] [Cryptography I](https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto)
- [ ] [Cryptography II](https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto2)
- [ ] [Computer Architecture](https://www.coursera.org/learn/comparch)
- [ ] [Introduction to Cyber Security](https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/introduction-to-cyber-security)
- [ ] [Computer Graphics](https://www.edx.org/course/computer-graphics-uc-san-diegox-cse167x)
- [ ] [Artificial Intelligence](https://www.edx.org/course/artificial-intelligence-uc-berkeleyx-cs188-1x#!)
- [ ] [Machine Learning](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning)
- [ ] [Operating Systems and System Programming](https://theopenacademy.com/content/operating-systems-and-system-programming)
- [ ] [Compilers](https://lagunita.stanford.edu/courses/Engineering/Compilers/Fall2014/about)
- [ ] [Introduction to Natural Language Processing](https://www.coursera.org/learn/natural-language-processing)
- [ ] [Computer Networks](https://lagunita.stanford.edu/courses/Engineering/Networking-SP/SelfPaced/about)
- [ ] [Parallel Computer Architecture and Programming](http://15418.courses.cs.cmu.edu/spring2016/home)


## Book Suggestions

* [You Don't Know JS: Scope & Closures](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/scope%20&%20closures/README.md#you-dont-know-js-scope--closures)
* [You Don't Know JS: this & Object Prototypes](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/this%20&%20object%20prototypes/README.md#you-dont-know-js-this--object-prototypes)
* [You Don't Know JS: Types & Grammar](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/types%20&%20grammar/README.md#you-dont-know-js-types--grammar)
* [You Don't Know JS: Async & Performance](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/async%20&%20performance/README.md#you-dont-know-js-async--performance)
* [You Don't Know JS: ES6 & Beyond](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/es6%20&%20beyond/README.md#you-dont-know-js-es6--beyond)
* [Setting Up ES6](https://leanpub.com/setting-up-es6/read)
* [JavaScript Allongé, the "Six" Edition](https://leanpub.com/javascriptallongesix)
* [DOM Enlightenment](http://domenlightenment.com/)
* [JavaScript Design Patterns](https://addyosmani.com/resources/essentialjsdesignpatterns/book/)
* [Think Java - How to Think Like a Computer Scientist](http://greenteapress.com/wp/think-java/)
* [Open Data Structures](http://www.aupress.ca/books/120226/ebook/99Z_Morin_2013-Open_Data_Structures.pdf)
* [Professor Frisby's Mostly Adequate Guide to Functional Programming](https://www.gitbook.com/book/drboolean/mostly-adequate-guide/details)
* [Programming JavaScript Applications](http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1234000000262/index.html)

Additional books can be found [here](https://github.com/P1xt/speedstudy/blob/master/book-lists.md)


## Bonus List

| Activity                                    | Points for completing | Activity type |
| ------------------------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- |
| Basic Project                               | 100                   | project       |
| Substantial Project                         | 200                   | project       |
| Large Project                               | 300                   | project       |
| Gigantic Project                            | 400                   | project       |
| Duolingo or MosaLingua (1 level)            | 100                   | foundation    |
| Book                                        | 200                   | foundation    |
| Tutorial site (Udemy/Pluralsight/Egghead/Treehouse/etc) course                            | 100                   | foundation    |
| University level course (Coursera/edX/MITOCW/etc)                    | 500                   | foundation    |
| Physical Activity (30 minutes)                          | 10                    | foundation    |
| Musical Instrument Practice (30 minutes)                          | 10                    | foundation    |
| Khan Academy (30 minutes)                          | 10                    | foundation    |
| Analytics Vidhya Competition                | 50                    | data-science  |
| Crowd Analytix Competition                  | 50                    | data-science  |
| Kaggle Competition                          | 50                    | data-science  |
| Driven Data Competition                     | 50                    | data-science  |
| Blog Post on any topic                      | 15                    | communication |
| Blog Post Tutorial                          | 40                    | communication |
| Video Tutorial                              | 50                    | communication |
| Open Source PR                              | 50                    | communication |
| Module to npm                               | 200                   | communication |
| Team Up for a project                       | 100                   | communication |
| Diary entry                                 | 5                     | communication |
| CodeWars (10 problems)                      | 50                    | algorithms    |
| CodinGame (1 Tier)                          | 100                   | algorithms    |
| CodinGame (1 Bot Competition)               | 20                    | algorithms    |
| HackerRank (10 problems)                    | 50                    | algorithms    |
| Google Code Jam (1 round from past contest) | 100                   | algorithms    |

## Project ideas

*   Pick a template from [\[here\]](https://freebiesbug.com/psd-freebies/website-template/), [\[here\]](http://www.os-templates.com/free-website-templates), or [\[here\]](http://www.os-templates.com/free-website-templates) and implement the frontend of a website with it as your inspiration (do not use its assets)
*   Complete any 5 projects from [100 Days of CSS](https://100dayscss.com/).
*   Select an API from [Todd Motto's API List](https://github.com/toddmotto/public-apis) and build a frontend-only application powered by data fetched from the API you chose.
*   Complete a CSS theme for [CSS Zen Garden](http://www.csszengarden.com/)
*   Clone your favorite non-trivial website such as: Medium, Twitter, Slack, Netflix, Reddit.
*   Clone a video game such as: Breakout, Tetris, Pacman, Super Mario Bros, Zelda, Final Fantasy.
*   Complete any project on The Odin Project or FreeCodeCamp.
*   Clone your favorite browser extension, or create one you wish existed.
*   Clone your favorite mobile app, or create one you wish existed.
*   Any project you want to build - the above are all just ideas for if you're stuck for an idea - really, just build what you want!

Commit message:

Add link to logs and notes

README.md, after:

# 2018

The goal is to learn computer science subjects: algorithms, data structures and
the like. I'm also throwing in some maths, particularly discrete mathematics. I
also need to acquire web dev skills, so I'm doing coding projects as well.

## Rules

- Always be working on one course/project.
- Add bonus objectives from the bonus list as often as desired.
- All assignments must be completed for course to be considered complete.

## Link to original speedstudy repo

https://github.com/P1xt/speedstudy

## Progress

**Courses Completed:** 0

**Total Points earned:** 230

**Current Course:** TBD (working on a project)

**Current Project:**

- [fCC Voting App](https://www.freecodecamp.org/challenges/build-a-voting-app)

**Current Book(s):**

- [Discrete Mathematics: An Open Introduction](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi/)
* [You Don't Know JS: Scope & Closures](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/scope%20&%20closures/README.md#you-dont-know-js-scope--closures)

Be sure to check out the [logs]('/logs') and [notes]('/notes').

| Date Finished | Activity                  | Points | Links  |
| ------------- | ------------------------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| Jan 19        | Khan Academy              | 10     | [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/gckev/) |
| Jan 20        | Khan Academy              | 10     | [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/gckev/) |
| Jan 21        | Khan Academy              | 10     | [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/gckev/) |
| Jan 21        | YKDJS: Up & Going         | 200    | [YKDJS: Up & Going](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/tree/master/up%20&%20going#you-dont-know-js-up--going) |

## Computer Science Intensive

- [ ] [Learn to Code HTML & CSS](http://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/)
- [ ] [Introduction to Computer Science](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-computer-science-harvardx-cs50x#!)
- [ ] [Learn to Code Advanced HTML & CSS](http://learn.shayhowe.com/advanced-html-css/)
- [ ] [Effective Thinking Through Mathematics](https://www.edx.org/course/effective-thinking-through-mathematics-utaustinx-ut-9-01x)
- [ ] [Getting Sassy with CSS](http://www.sassshop.com/#/)
- [ ] [How to Code: Simple Data](https://www.edx.org/course/how-code-simple-data-ubcx-htc1x)
- [ ] [How to Code: Complex Data](https://www.edx.org/course/how-code-complex-data-ubcx-htc2x)
- [ ] [Software Construction: Data Abstraction](https://www.edx.org/course/software-construction-data-abstraction-ubcx-softconst1x)
- [ ] [Software Construction: Object-Oriented Design](https://www.edx.org/course/software-construction-object-oriented-ubcx-softconst2x)
- [ ] [Software Engineering: Introduction](https://www.edx.org/course/software-engineering-introduction-ubcx-softeng1x)
- [ ] [Programming for the Web with JavaScript](https://www.edx.org/course/programming-web-javascript-pennx-sd4x)
- [ ] [MongoDB for Node.js Developers](https://university.mongodb.com/courses/M101JS/about)
- [ ] [Calculus One](https://www.coursera.org/learn/calculus1)
- [ ] [Mathematics for Computer Science](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-042j-mathematics-for-computer-science-spring-2015/index.htm)
- [ ] [Algorithms, Part I](https://www.coursera.org/learn/algorithms-part1)
- [ ] [Algorithms, Part II](https://www.coursera.org/learn/algorithms-part2)
- [ ] [UX Design for Mobile Developers](https://www.udacity.com/course/ux-design-for-mobile-developers--ud849)
- [ ] [Android Development for Beginners](https://www.udacity.com/course/android-basics-user-interface--ud834)
- [ ] [Software Testing](https://www.udacity.com/course/software-testing--cs258)
- [ ] [Software Debugging](https://www.udacity.com/course/software-debugging--cs259)
- [ ] [Calculus Two: Sequences and Series](https://www.coursera.org/learn/advanced-calculus)
- [ ] [Software Architecture & Design](https://www.udacity.com/course/software-architecture-design--ud821)
- [ ] [Databases mini-courses](https://lagunita.stanford.edu/courses/DB/2014/SelfPaced/about)
- [ ] [Agile Software Development](https://www.edx.org/course/agile-software-development-ethx-asd-1x)
- [ ] [Introduction to Cloud Infrastructure Technologies](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-cloud-infrastructure-linuxfoundationx-lfs151-x)
- [ ] [Intro to Theoretical Computer Science](https://www.udacity.com/course/intro-to-theoretical-computer-science--cs313)
- [ ] [Introduction to Probability - The Science of Uncertainty](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-probability-science-mitx-6-041x-2)
- [ ] [Linear Algebra - Foundations to Frontiers](https://www.edx.org/course/linear-algebra-foundations-frontiers-utaustinx-ut-5-04x#!)
- [ ] [Cryptography I](https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto)
- [ ] [Cryptography II](https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto2)
- [ ] [Computer Architecture](https://www.coursera.org/learn/comparch)
- [ ] [Introduction to Cyber Security](https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/introduction-to-cyber-security)
- [ ] [Computer Graphics](https://www.edx.org/course/computer-graphics-uc-san-diegox-cse167x)
- [ ] [Artificial Intelligence](https://www.edx.org/course/artificial-intelligence-uc-berkeleyx-cs188-1x#!)
- [ ] [Machine Learning](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning)
- [ ] [Operating Systems and System Programming](https://theopenacademy.com/content/operating-systems-and-system-programming)
- [ ] [Compilers](https://lagunita.stanford.edu/courses/Engineering/Compilers/Fall2014/about)
- [ ] [Introduction to Natural Language Processing](https://www.coursera.org/learn/natural-language-processing)
- [ ] [Computer Networks](https://lagunita.stanford.edu/courses/Engineering/Networking-SP/SelfPaced/about)
- [ ] [Parallel Computer Architecture and Programming](http://15418.courses.cs.cmu.edu/spring2016/home)


## Book Suggestions

* [You Don't Know JS: Scope & Closures](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/scope%20&%20closures/README.md#you-dont-know-js-scope--closures)
* [You Don't Know JS: this & Object Prototypes](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/this%20&%20object%20prototypes/README.md#you-dont-know-js-this--object-prototypes)
* [You Don't Know JS: Types & Grammar](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/types%20&%20grammar/README.md#you-dont-know-js-types--grammar)
* [You Don't Know JS: Async & Performance](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/async%20&%20performance/README.md#you-dont-know-js-async--performance)
* [You Don't Know JS: ES6 & Beyond](https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/master/es6%20&%20beyond/README.md#you-dont-know-js-es6--beyond)
* [Setting Up ES6](https://leanpub.com/setting-up-es6/read)
* [JavaScript Allongé, the "Six" Edition](https://leanpub.com/javascriptallongesix)
* [DOM Enlightenment](http://domenlightenment.com/)
* [JavaScript Design Patterns](https://addyosmani.com/resources/essentialjsdesignpatterns/book/)
* [Think Java - How to Think Like a Computer Scientist](http://greenteapress.com/wp/think-java/)
* [Open Data Structures](http://www.aupress.ca/books/120226/ebook/99Z_Morin_2013-Open_Data_Structures.pdf)
* [Professor Frisby's Mostly Adequate Guide to Functional Programming](https://www.gitbook.com/book/drboolean/mostly-adequate-guide/details)
* [Programming JavaScript Applications](http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1234000000262/index.html)

Additional books can be found [here](https://github.com/P1xt/speedstudy/blob/master/book-lists.md)


## Bonus List

| Activity                                    | Points for completing | Activity type |
| ------------------------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- |
| Basic Project                               | 100                   | project       |
| Substantial Project                         | 200                   | project       |
| Large Project                               | 300                   | project       |
| Gigantic Project                            | 400                   | project       |
| Duolingo or MosaLingua (1 level)            | 100                   | foundation    |
| Book                                        | 200                   | foundation    |
| Tutorial site (Udemy/Pluralsight/Egghead/Treehouse/etc) course                            | 100                   | foundation    |
| University level course (Coursera/edX/MITOCW/etc)                    | 500                   | foundation    |
| Physical Activity (30 minutes)                          | 10                    | foundation    |
| Musical Instrument Practice (30 minutes)                          | 10                    | foundation    |
| Khan Academy (30 minutes)                          | 10                    | foundation    |
| Analytics Vidhya Competition                | 50                    | data-science  |
| Crowd Analytix Competition                  | 50                    | data-science  |
| Kaggle Competition                          | 50                    | data-science  |
| Driven Data Competition                     | 50                    | data-science  |
| Blog Post on any topic                      | 15                    | communication |
| Blog Post Tutorial                          | 40                    | communication |
| Video Tutorial                              | 50                    | communication |
| Open Source PR                              | 50                    | communication |
| Module to npm                               | 200                   | communication |
| Team Up for a project                       | 100                   | communication |
| Diary entry                                 | 5                     | communication |
| CodeWars (10 problems)                      | 50                    | algorithms    |
| CodinGame (1 Tier)                          | 100                   | algorithms    |
| CodinGame (1 Bot Competition)               | 20                    | algorithms    |
| HackerRank (10 problems)                    | 50                    | algorithms    |
| Google Code Jam (1 round from past contest) | 100                   | algorithms    |

## Project ideas

*   Pick a template from [\[here\]](https://freebiesbug.com/psd-freebies/website-template/), [\[here\]](http://www.os-templates.com/free-website-templates), or [\[here\]](http://www.os-templates.com/free-website-templates) and implement the frontend of a website with it as your inspiration (do not use its assets)
*   Complete any 5 projects from [100 Days of CSS](https://100dayscss.com/).
*   Select an API from [Todd Motto's API List](https://github.com/toddmotto/public-apis) and build a frontend-only application powered by data fetched from the API you chose.
*   Complete a CSS theme for [CSS Zen Garden](http://www.csszengarden.com/)
*   Clone your favorite non-trivial website such as: Medium, Twitter, Slack, Netflix, Reddit.
*   Clone a video game such as: Breakout, Tetris, Pacman, Super Mario Bros, Zelda, Final Fantasy.
*   Complete any project on The Odin Project or FreeCodeCamp.
*   Clone your favorite browser extension, or create one you wish existed.
*   Clone your favorite mobile app, or create one you wish existed.
*   Any project you want to build - the above are all just ideas for if you're stuck for an idea - really, just build what you want!
